So the other day this new team member joined our company, got access to Slack and soon afterwards asked the following question: “Ok…question…I want to post a comment to a previous specific comment, regarding @satya.vh ‘s posting on May 9, but am not seeing an option to do so…can i not do that, or is this just one long continuous thread?? The first analysis — Slack’s $2.8 Billion Dollar Secret Sauce — that went viral is from Andrew Wilkonson of Metalab, the design agency that helped Slack founder Stewart Butterfield (who was founder of Flickr in case you didn’t know) to turn his code into Slack’s fun product. How to replicate the success So yes, to replicate Slacks’ success you need a well designed product, an experienced team, perfect timing and amazing execution, as Andrew Wilkonso, Matt Hobb and Slack founder Steward Butterfield rightfully concluded. (Slack actually needs people to invest a mere 2000 message for the effect to take off) This is the real reason that makes social platforms like Slack, Facebook and Snapchat billion dollar companies. And that results in: #1 Social isolation / pressure Because if you don’t follow Slack all the time, other people reference or know stuff on Slack that you don’t know and you don’t take part in. Before you know, half the people are missing conversations, find themselves socially isolated, and you start paying licenses because your internal communication and company culture just fails. ?” Then I remembered when we started using Slack at Fileboard, I really didn’t like it, and it certainly wasn’t fun to use for the exact same reason that my new colleague was pointing out. Which means, If you didn’t check Slack enough, which put you in social isolation, now there’s no way for you to see a conversation ever again and drag yourself out of social isolation. For example, if each person in your company is posting like 100 messages a day, and your team is 100 people in total, you already need to start paying to avoid social isolation. More and more information is going into Slack (exactly the reason why Slack has hundreds of integrations and more popping up each week) and the team is heavily invested in it. Within companies it is very important to inform yourself about what’s going on, not only for your job but also for your position within the company and your future ambitions. I see colleagues Slack at night, weekends, days off, when their wife is labouring, etc, which basically put Slack on the same level as email, Facebook and Whatsapp. And then you find out you need to start paying… Why Slack’s business model is evilly brilliant Slack’s business model is essentially based on historical messages. Being a designer, Andrew’s conclusion is (not that suprising) design focussed: Slack just feels, looks and sounds different than the boring enterprise competition. The REAL reason We’ve been using Slack for over a year now at Fileboard (a sales engagement platform) and basically all